Process improvement projects are used by many businesses and organizations to make improvements in the way they operate. Several things are important to a successful process improvement project, but every project begins with identifying the problem that needs to be resolved. Understanding what a problem statement is and how to write one can help you become more successful when working on process improvement projects.

In this article, we discuss what a problem statement is and the key elements of a problem statement with an example.

Related jobs near you
Chennai, TN
Part-time jobs
Full-time jobs
Remote jobs
Urgently hiring jobs
View more jobs on Indeed
What is a problem statement?
A problem statement is a concise description of the problem or issues a project seeks to address. The problem statement identifies the current state, the desired future state and any gaps between the two. A problem statement is an important communication tool that can help ensure everyone working on a project knows what the problem they need to address is and why the project is important.

Related: Problem-Solving Skills: Definitions and Examples
Importance of a problem statement
A problem statement is important to a process improvement project because it helps clearly identify the goals of the project and outline the scope of a project. It also helps guide the activities and decisions of the people who are working on the project. The problem statement can help a business or organization gain support and buy-in for a process improvement project.

Related: Analytical Skills: Definitions and Examples
What are the key elements of a problem statement?
There are four key elements you should include when writing a problem statement:

1. Ideal situation
The first thing your problem statement should describe is what the ideal situation would be if there wasn't a problem you needed to address. This section identifies the goals and scope of the project are. This section should create a clear understanding of what the ideal environment will be once the issue has been resolved.

2. Reality
The next section of your problem statement should describe what the current reality is for your company or organization. This section will identify what the problem is, state why it is a problem and identify who the problem is impacting. It will also describe when and where the problem was identified.

3. Consequences
The next section of your problem statement should identify what the consequences of the problem are. This section describes the effects of the problem by describing how the people affected by the problem are being impacted and quantifying how much the problem is impacting them. Common consequences can include the loss of time, money, resources, competitive advantage, productivity and more.

4. Proposal
The proposal section of a problem statement may contain several possible solutions to the problem, but it is important to remember that it does not need to identify a specific solution. The purpose of the proposal section should be to guide the project team on how they can research, investigate and resolve the problem.

How to write a problem statement
A good problem statement can be created by identifying and answering several questions related to the problem. The process used to write a problem statement should involve answering questions using a method commonly known as 5W2H.

This process involves identifying what the problem is, why it is a problem, when and where the problem was identified, who the problem impacts, how they are impacted by the problem and how much of an impact the problem has. You can use the following process to craft a problem statement that addresses the following:

1. Identify the problem
Before you can begin writing your problem statement, you first need to identify what the problem is.

2. Begin your statement with your ideal situation
Next, you can begin writing your problem statement by describing what the ideal environment would look like if your problem didn't exist. This section should try to describe what your company hopes to accomplish as a result of the process improvement project.

3. Describe current gaps
Next, write the reality section of your problem statement. Your goal in this section should be to clearly identify what the current environment looks like. In this section, you should identify what the problem is, what is causing the problem and why it is an issue. You should also describe when, where and how you were able to identify the problem.

4. State the consequences of the problem
Next, write the consequences section of your problem statement. This section is used to quantify and support the claim of what the problem is. You can use this section to identify specific numbers such as the amount of time or revenue being lost or the number of resources being wasted. It is important to include concrete numbers that support your claims in this section.

5. Propose addressing the problem
Finally, end your statement with a proposal section. In this section, you should try to identify how your company will make progress toward reaching your goals and accomplishing your ideal environment. While you may choose to identify several possible solutions in this section, it is more important to focus on identifying how your company will find those solutions than it is to identify the specific solution that will be used.

Related: 6 Tips for Effective Teamwork
Upgrade your resume
Showcase your skills with help from a resume expert
Problem statement example
Here is an example of a problem statement for a sales call center:

Ideal situation:
Ideally, our sales associates would be able to maximize their production by being able to make more contacts with leads each day.

Reality:
Currently, our sales associates are unable to maximize the number of leads they are contacting each day because they are spending too much time finding qualified leads to call and inserting lead information into the system before making calls. This is a problem because the time our sales associates are spending finding leads and entering lead information into our system could be used to contact more qualified leads and generate more sales. We identified this problem in our sales call center while surveying to gather feedback from our sales associates about what limits their ability to maximize their sales numbers.

Consequences:
Our sales associates currently spend about two hours per day finding qualified leads and another two hours per day entering lead information into our system before they begin making calls. This means our sales associates are only spending half of their workday actually making calls to qualified leads.

Because our sales associates are not able to use their entire shift to make contact with leads, their overall sales numbers are being impacted. Our company estimates that our sales associates would be able to make at least double the number of sales if they were able to spend their entire shift contacting qualified leads.

Proposal:
Our company seeks to resolve this issue by creating a process improvement team to identify several potential solutions for how we can reduce the time our sales associates spend not making contact with qualified leads.