Project Documentation and Its Importance in 2023
By Eshna Verma
Last updated on Apr 7, 2023212632
Project Documentation and Its Importance
Table of Contents
What Is Project Documentation?Project Documentation UsesDetails of Project Documentation Phases
Project management leaders are often asked a common question: what is the importance of project documentation and how can I ensure I’m performing the function right. There’s no doubt that project documentation is a vital part of Project management training. The essential two functions of documentation substantiate it: to make sure that project requirements are fulfilled and to establish traceability concerning what has been done, who has done it, and when it has been done. 

Are you looking forward to making a mark in the Project Management field? If yes, enroll in the PMP Certification Program now and get a step closer to your career goal!

What Is Project Documentation?
Project documentation consists of a collection of documents that the project manager creates during the project's development process. The project team is expected to follow certain procedures, specifications, and guidelines for such documents, including a project plan, schedule, and budget.

Documentation must lay the foundation for quality, traceability, and history for both the individual document and for the complete project documentation. It is also essential that the documentation is well arranged, easy to read, and adequate.

PMP Certification Essential for Senior-Level Roles
PMP Certification TrainingEXPLORE COURSEPMP Certification Essential for Senior-Level Roles
Project Documentation Uses
Experienced project managers excel at making and following standard templates for their project documents. They reuse successful project plans, business cases, requirement sheets, and project status reports to help them focus on their core competency of managing the project rather than balancing the unmanageable paperwork.

Project management usually follows major phases: Initiation, Planning, Control, and Closure.

Project Details

Details of Project Documentation Phases
Feasibility Report
The purpose of a feasibility report is to investigate and showcase task requirements and to determine whether the project is worthwhile and feasible. Feasibility is verified by five primary factors – technology and system, economic, legal, operational, and schedule. Secondary feasibility factors include market, resource, culture, and financial factors.

Project Charter
Project charter is sometimes also known as the project overview statement. A project charter includes high-level planning components of a project, laying the foundation for the project. It acts as an anchor, holding you to the project's objectives and guiding you as a navigator through the milestones. It is formal approval of the project.

Requirement Specification
A requirement specification document is a complete description of the system to be developed. It contains all interactions users will have with the system as well as non-functional requirements. 

Get up to INR 21 Lakhs After Clearing PMP Exam
PMP Certification TrainingEXPLORE COURSEGet up to INR 21 Lakhs After Clearing PMP Exam
Design Document
The design document showcases the high- or low-level design components of the system. The design document used for high-level design gradually evolves to include low-level design details. This document describes the architectural strategies of the system.

Work Plan/Estimate
A work plan sets out the phases, activities, and tasks needed to deliver a project. The timeframes required to deliver a project, as well as resources and milestones, are also shown in a work plan. The work plan is referred to continually throughout the project. Actual progress is reviewed daily against the stated plan and is, therefore, the most critical document to deliver projects successfully.

Traceability Matrix
A traceability matrix is a table that traces a requirement to the tests that are needed to verify that the requirement is fulfilled. A useful traceability matrix will provide backward and forward traceability: a requirement can be traced to a test and a test to a requirement.

Issue Tracker
An issue tracker manages and maintains a list of issues. It helps add issues, assign them to people, and track the status and current responsibilities. It also helps develop a knowledge base that contains information on resolutions to common problems.

Here are 200+ Project Management Templates and Documents.

6% Growth in PM Jobs By 2024 - Upskill Now
UMass PGP Project ManagementEXPLORE COURSE6% Growth in PM Jobs By 2024 - Upskill Now
Change Management Document
A change management document is used to capture progress and to record all changes made to a system. This helps in linking unanticipated adverse effects of a change.

Test Document
A test document includes a test plan and test cases. A test case is a detailed procedure that thoroughly tests a feature or an aspect of a feature. While a test plan describes what to test, a test case describes how to perform a particular test.

Are you interested in taking up a Project Management Professional certification training? Check out our PMP® Certification Course Preview.
Technical Document
The technical document includes product definition and specification, design, manufacturing/development, quality assurance, product/system liability, product presentation, description of features, functions, and interfaces, safe and correct use, service and repair of a technical product as well as its safe disposal.

